
Today, we are thinking about the glory of God’s creation, joining in with many other people as they celebrate Earth Day today. 
	For those who may not have heard of it, Earth Day is an annual celebration on 22 April, and call to action, that has been taking place for nearly 50 years now. Earth Day is a global event: more than 1 billion people participate across 192 countries. There are celebrations, marches to Government buildings, petitions signed, trees are planted, litter picks happen, and politicians respond by announcing new ecological measures and targets. It is a hugely important day of the year and this year, not surprisingly, the focus of Earth Day is Plastic Pollution across the globe.
	All of us, I’m sure, are only too aware of the terrible situation in which we find ourselves with regard to Plastic Pollution. The images that we see on the TV are horrifying. The statistics and data almost incomprehensible. 8 million tons of plastic enter the oceans each year, which is the equivalent of emptying a fully loaded rubbish truck of plastic into the ocean every single minute of the year. It is estimated that there is more microplastic in the oceans than there are stars in the Milky Way. 1 in 3 species of marine mammals have been found entangled in marine litter and 80% of marine litter is plastic.
	The statistics go on and on…it’s a terrible situation. And it is wonderful that individuals, companies and Governments are now waking up to the reality and being proactive in response. But as Chris Packham said on the One Show this week, Governments cannot stop plastic pollution: only we can stop it by reducing our own usage of plastic and recycling properly. As grateful as we are to Michael Gove, the Environment Secretary, and his team, it is not his responsibility to save the planet from Plastic Pollution. It is our responsibility – and we must change how we behave and what we buy. This is God’s world – this is God’s beautiful world – and we are merely stewards of it for this generation.
	And why did God create the world in the first place? The answer is very simple: to reveal his glory.
	So much of our lives is spent engaging with social media. But God has the greatest social media of all. It’s not a Facebook Profile, its not Instagram. He’s not on Pinterest. God’s social media is creation itself; the created order, the whole cosmos, is God’s social media. It’s how he makes himself known to us all. Psalm 19 starts with these words: “How clearly the sky reveals God’s glory! How plainly it shows what he has done!” Creation itself is the ultimate social media for God
	Through creation, God does not whisper to us, or hint about how wonderful he is. Through creation God shouts out his glory to us. “How clearly the sky reveals God’s glory!”
	Every time we look out the window, every time we look at the sky, every time we watch the waves of the sea or the rolling landscapes of the countryside, God is shouting to us of how glory. Whatever the season of the year, whether there is hail, sunshine or snow, God speaks to us of his creativity and love, his power and his compassion.
	The language of creation is the language of God. God speaks, and creation happens: that’s what we read throughout Genesis 1. ‘God said, “Let there be light”, and there was light…’ and so on. And when the apostle Paul was preaching the Gospel in Lystra, what did he say? Acts 14:17: “[God] has always given evidence of his existence by the good things he does: he gives you rain from heaven and crops at the right times; he gives you food and fills your hearts with happiness.” Creation proclaims the glory of God: that is its sole purpose.
	Now, exactly how God created the world is subject to much debate, of course, and the Bible doesn’t really help us to find an answer to this. The Bible is not a Science Manual – it has a different purpose altogether. Genesis chapters 1 and 2 do not try to present a scientific account of creation: they were written with a different purpose in mind.
Genesis 1 was probably written in the 6th-C BC, when the people of Israel were in exile in Babylon. And there was a Babylonian myth about how their gods had created the world that was in the form of a poem. And so Genesis 1 was written as a sort of ‘counter-claim’: you Babylonians think your gods created the world but actually, our God created the world. And Genesis 1 is written in the style of a poem that matches the claims of the Babylonian myth, so it’s a sort of ‘My God is better than your God’ poem.
	Now, that’s not to say that God didn’t create the world in 6 days: maybe he did. But the purpose of Genesis 1 is not actually to tell us scientific fact. Instead, it is a claim to the greatness of our God above all gods. So we don’t need to worry about whether or not this is a literal account.
	Instead, what we learn from this part of Scripture is the glorious, all-powerful nature of God and the fact that we, as human beings, find our meaning in life in relation to the rest of creation.
	God made us in his own image and then he immediately placed us into a relationship with the rest of the created order. Verse 26 we heard read a few minutes ago: God says of human beings, “Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the wild animals of the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.”
	Now, we can come at this verse from dozens of different angles, but undeniably, we are remember our context in creation and that we can only fully understand ourselves as we relate to the created order. If I do not locate myself within the created order, I will only be able to live my life in reference to myself as if I truly am the centre of the Universe. If I don’t locate myself in relationship with everything else that is created, my ego will become inflated and I will think that every decision I make, every action I perform should revolve around me. And furthermore, I will expect the people around me to treat me as if I am the centre of the Universe. But I am not the centre of the Universe: I am just one small part of an extraordinary network that incorporates galaxies near and far, billions of people, and the history of a cosmos that stretches back to the dawn of time. All the while I allow my ego to inflate my position in the created order, I cannot find true meaning in life because I will be living an egotistical lie.
	It really is not all about you. It really is not all about me.
	It really is all about God – and we need to find our true place in relation to God and his creation if we are to find true meaning and true purpose.
	And so, as we mark Earth Day today, we reflect on the fact that, as Christians, we have a two-fold relationship with creation: Responsibility and Accountability.
	What is the oldest profession in the world? No, it’s not what you think it is! The oldest profession in the world is landscape gardening. The Biblical poem in Genesis 1 tells us that created the world and then immediately created human beings and his first words to humans was this: verse 28: “Have many children, so that your descendants will live all over the earth and bring it under their control…” Landscape gardening on a massive scale!
	God creates us and then immediately gives us the responsibility of shaping his creation, bringing order into it, bringing it under control. If we do not live our lives in such a way that we are caring for creation, we are dishonouring God in a terrible way. It would be like saying how much we admire Rembrandt whilst at the same time ripping up one of his paintings. We cannot say that we love God if we are not going to live our lives attempting to follow the very first command he gave us, which is to care responsibly for his creation.
	Yes, God has given us dominion over creation - but dominion is not the same thing as domination. We do not have license to rape the resources of the planet. We do not have license to destroy rain forests for our own comfort and luxury. We do not have license to bring harm and suffering to marine just so that we can drink a bottle of water and throw it carelessly away. We have been given a sacred responsibility to care for the world God gives us.
	God speaks in anger about this in Ezekiel 34:18 when he says this: “Some of you are not satisfied with eating the best grass; you even trample down what you don’t eat! You drink the clear water and muddy what you don’t drink! My other sheep have to eat the grass you trample down and drink the water you muddy.”
	It is unacceptable to God that we mistreat his creation and thereby bring suffering and pain to others. We absolutely have a responsibility to do better…
	How do we do that in a practical way?
	I was reading a Blog post this week in which the writer suggested that we need to do CPR on the planet. What did he mean by CPR? Three things…
	C means we are to Clean creation as much as possible; keep our air, land and water as clean as we can, free from pollution in any form.
	P means we are to Pick Up the rubbish where we see it, without just walking past, thinking someone else will do it.
	R means we should Recycle so that our trash can be used in a more constructive way after we have finished with it.
	CPR. Clean. Pick Up. Recycle.
	A few years ago, when I was Vicar in Stratford, East London, my house was broken into and I was burgled. I don’t know if any of you have experienced this, but it really is such a soul-destroying feeling; walking into your house to see windows smashed, drawers turned out, the carpet soiled, ornaments broken and items missing. It’s a horrible feeling. And I reckon that is how God feels when he sees how we are mistreating his creation; that sinking feeling in his heart as we trash his home. It cannot go on. As humans, we have a responsibility to care for God’s creation and he will hold us accountable for our actions.
	Where does it start? Not with Michael Gove, the Environment Secretary. Not with the organizers of Earth Day. Not with the politicians meeting to discuss Plastic Pollution at the Heads of the Commonwealth Summit. It starts with me. It starts with you.
	What are we going to do to make this world a better place? How can we perform CPR on Planet Earth?
	We simply cannot glorify the Creator whilst, at the same time, treating his creation with contempt. It starts with me. It starts with you.
	Together, let’s rise to the challenge.

I want to finish with a prayer from an ancient holy man called Brendanus Scotus:

Come Lord Christ, king of the earth,
lead us as we walk with you
that the earth may be healed.

Come, Holy Spirit hovering over the water
and guide us as we sail to you,
that the waters may flow with life.

Come, you angels of the fire and light
and show us how to dance with you,
that in the light may be born
the flame of love.

Come, you breath of the air,
and inspire us with the breath of you,
that the air may reverberate with
the sound of the word.
Come, Lady Mary and the saints of heaven
and help us to pray with you,
that the earth may be redeemed through
the love of Christ. Amen.
Happy New Year!
Well, it’s not New Year in the Calendar sense, of course, but September does always feel to me like a ‘new year’ in the church sense because it’s as we all come back after a good Summer break.
And so, at the beginning of this new church year, it’s a good time for us to think about our own response to following God’s call on our lives. And it’s a particularly good opportunity for us this year because of two other things: Firstly, we have our Archdeacon’s Visitation on Tuesday, which is the church equivalent of an Ofsted Inspection and out of that will come a report from the Diocese
reviewing all that we have achieved in the past three years and giving us some thoughts and priorities as we move into the future. And also, we will be launching our new Mission Action Plan at some stage very soon, which will give us the blueprint for our priorities over the coming years as a church family together.
So it’s a good time for us to be thinking about our covenant relationship with God and how we want to be committed in our discipleship and our walk with God throughout 2018 and beyond.
So, I want to think a little bit about our reading from Genesis 12:1-9 because it draws on the key themes of faithfulness to God’s vision and our desire to walk with him. And, we understand the need to have some sort of vision of God and our own lives, not down to the finest detail, of course, (God doesn’t work like that), but enough for us to journey forward. In Proverbs 29, we are reminded that, “Where there is no vision, the people perish”. If we have no vision of God, we cannot pursue God. If we have no vision of God, we will perish – our faith will grow cold. But if we devote ourselves to developing a vision of God, all the rest will fall into place. And, as our vision of God develops through worship, so our faithfulness to God will develop.
What is faithfulness? Faithfulness is just what it says – to be full of faith. Now we need to remember that faith and belief are two different things…
You might know the story of Blondin, who lived in Canada at the turn of the 20th-century. And he made his living out of walking the Niagra Falls on a tightrope and his party trick was to do this pushing a wheelbarrow! One day, he turned to the crowd and said, “Do you believe I can go across this tightrope with someone sitting in the wheelbarrow?” Well, of course, the crowd went crazy with delight, shouting and cheering him on. So Blondin turned to one woman and said, “Do you believe I can do it?” “Of course,” she said. “Well, get in the wheelbarrow and let’s do it!”
Did she get in? No! Because she believed he could do it – but didn’t have enough faith to be a part of it.
And that’s the difference: we can believe in God, but the life to which we are called is one where we exhibit faith: enough faith to step out with God, to get into the wheelbarrow, and allow ourselves to be carried through life by him.
Do we have belief? Yes, we do.
Do we have faith? That’s a different question altogether…
Faith and belief go hand in hand, but they are not the same thing.
And that wonderful story we’ve just heard from Genesis 12 is all about stepping out in faith with God and discovering a new beginning.
And there’s just three things I want to draw out of Abram’s story that speak to us about new beginnings and faithfulness to God.
1. Faithfulness means going on a journey
What’s the first word that God says to Abram? “Leave”.
When we give our lives over to God and pursue a vision of him, one thing is absolutely clear: we are not called to stand still!
Wherever you are at in your life, God says, “Leave”. Not because where you are at is a wrong place to be, but because the nature of the Christian life is a journey – constantly moving on into the vision of God.
So wherever you are at, no matter how holy you may be, no matter how comfortable you may be: “Leave”. It’s time to journey onwards – it’s always time to journey onwards into God. It’s never a time to stand still.
And of course, and this is my second point…
2. Faithfulness leaves us feeling vulnerable
God says to Abram, “Leave your country, your people and your father’s household”.
Abram was 75 years old! He was enjoying retirement, feet up, slippers on, warming himself in front of the fire and God says, “Leave your country, your people and your father’s household”.
How much more vulnerable can you get? Everything inside of him must have screamed, “Stay!” But God said, “Leave!” and so he had to go, stepping out into the unknown…
But crucially, this journey into vulnerability was made on a promise: the promise that God would lead him forward. God says, “Leave your country, your people and your father’s household and go to the land I will show you.” Wherever God is taking us beyond today, it is not up a blind alley. There is a destination for us.
Now I want to be really clear about this because this is a real misunderstanding that many Christians have. Sometimes, Christians believe that there is some sort of road-map for us to follow; that God, quite literally, has our life mapped out for us and our task is to somehow work out what that map is and follow the route marked out for us. But I don’t think that is true at all…
The Bible never, ever suggests that our life choices are predestined – the complete opposite in fact! And in this story from Genesis 12, we have a perfect example of that: God says, “Go to the land I will show you”. There is no road map given to Abram…
I find it helpful for myself to change the metaphor. Rather than God giving me a road map to get through life, I think he gives me a compass – and as long as I am generally heading Due North, I am going in the right direction. There are times when I might veer off to East or West a bit. There are times when I might have to re-tread my steps South. I can even come off the road for a bit and enjoy the views. But, with compass in hand, heading Due North, I know that I am heading to the land that God has promised to me.
There is a destination. I don’t have a road map: I don’t even need a road map. I just need to head Due North and I’ll get there…
Thirdly, and finally…
3. There is an appropriate attitude to adopt for the journey
Clearly, to step out on the journey, we need to have an attitude of obedience. Verse 1, God says, “Leave your country…” Verse 4, “So Abram left…” We’ve talked about obedience already.
But crucially, Abram’s journey with God was also undertaken in an attitude of worship. Twice in this short passage, Abram stops to worship God. In verse 7, at Moreh, Abram stops to build an altar to the Lord. In verse 8, at Bethel, he builds another altar and prays. In all his anxieties and fear and sense of vulnerability, Abram prioritises times of worship as his stability and focus.
And so must we prioritise worship, in the busyness of our lives, as we journey into God’s future together.
And finally, finally, verse 9 is of paramount importance: “Then Abram set out and continued towards the Negev”. It seems a bit odd to finish in the middle of a story. But actually, we need to remember that 2018 and the launch of our new Mission Action Plan is just the next stage on our journey into God’s future: it is not the destination. We are always moving on, always journeying on, never arriving – just hitting the next stage of where God wants us to be…
So today, like Abram, we commit ourselves to the journey of faithfulness wherever it may take us: feeling vulnerable, yes, but in absolute confidence that our God is the God of the Journey.
We don’t need a road map. We need a vision of God. And, like Abram, we dedicate ourselves to worshipping the God of the Journey in 2018 and beyond. Amen.

“This do in remembrance of Me.”
1 Corinthians 11:24
IT seems, then, that Christians may forget Christ. The text implies the possibility of forgetfulness concerning Him whom gratitude and affection should constrain them to remember. There could be no need for this loving exhortation if there were not a fearful supposition that our memories might prove treacherous and our remembrance superficial in its character, or changing in its nature. Nor is this a bare supposition–it is, alas, too well confirmed in our experience, not as a possibility, but as a lamentable fact. It seems at first sight too gross a crime to lay at the door of converted men.
It appears almost impossible that those who have been redeemed by the blood of the dying Lamb should ever forget their Ransomer–that those who have been loved with an everlasting love by the eternal Son of God, should ever forget that Son. But if startling to the ear, it is, alas, too apparent to the eye to allow us to deny the fact. Forget Him who never forgot us? Forget Him who poured His blood forth for our sins? Forget Him who loved us even to the death? Can it be possible? Yes it is not only possible, but conscience confesses that it is too sadly a fault of all of us–that we can remember anything except Christ.
The Object which we should make the monarch of our hearts is the very thing we are most inclined to forget. Where one would think that memory would linger and unmindfulness would be an unknown intruder–that is the very spot which is desecrated by the feet of forgetfulness–the place where memory too seldom looks. I appeal to the conscience of every Christian here–can you deny the truth of what I utter? Do you not find yourselves forgetful of Jesus? Some creature steals away your heart and you are unmindful of Him upon whom your affection ought to be set. Some earthly business engrosses your attention when you should have your eye steadily fixed upon the Cross.
It is the incessant round of world, world, world–the constant din of earth, earth, earth, that takes away the soul from Christ. Oh, my Friends, is it not too sadly true that we can recollect anything but Christ and forget nothing so easy as Him whom we ought to remember? While memory will preserve a poisoned weed, it suffers the Rose of Sharon to wither.
The cause of this is very apparent–it lies in one or two facts. We forget Christ because regenerate persons as we are–still corruption and death remain even in us. We forget Him because we carry about with us the old Adam of sin and death. If we were purely new-born creatures, we should never forget the name of Him whom we love. If we were entirely regenerated beings, we should sit down and meditate on what our Savior did and suffered. As He is. All He has gloriously promised to perform. And never would our roving affections stray, but stay centered, nailed, fixed eternally to one Object–we should continually contemplate the death and sufferings of our Lord.
But alas, we have a worm in the heart, an abode of pests, a morgue within. Lusts, vile imaginations and strong evil passions like wells of poisonous water send out streams of impurity. I have a heart, which God knows I wish I could wring from my body and hurl to an infinite distance. I have a soul which is a cave of unclean birds, a den of loathsome creatures where dragons haunt and owls do congregate, where every evil beast dwells–a heart too vile to have a parallel–“deceitful above all things and desperately wicked.”
This is the reason why I am forgetful of Christ. Nor is this the sole cause. I suspect it lies somewhere else, too. We forget Christ because there are so many other things around us to attract our attention, “But,” you say, “they ought not to do so, because though they are around us, they are nothing in comparison with Jesus Christ–though they are in dread proximity to our hearts, what are they compared with Christ?” But do you know, dear Friends, that the nearness of an object has a very great effect upon its power? The sun is many, many times larger than the moon, but the moon has a greater influence upon the tides of the ocean than the sun, simply because it is nearer and has a greater power of attraction.
So I find that a little crawling worm of the earth has more effect upon my soul than the glorious Christ in Heaven. A handful of golden earth, a puff of fame, a shout of applause, a thriving business, my house, my home will affect me more than all the glories of the upper world. Yes, than the beatific vision itself–simply because earth is near and Heaven is far away. Happy day, when I shall be borne aloft on angels' wings to dwell forever near my Lord–to bask in the sunshine of His smile and to be lost in the ineffable radiance of His lovely countenance.
We see, then, the cause of forgetfulness. Let us blush over it. Let us be sad that we neglect our Lord so much. And now let us attend to His Word, “This do in remembrance of Me,” hoping that its solemn sounds may charm away the demon of base ingratitude.
We shall speak, first of all, concerning the blessed Object of memory. Secondly, upon the advantages to be derived from remembering this Person. Thirdly the gracious help, to our memory–“This do in remembrance of Me.” And fourthly, the gentle command, “This do in remembrance of Me.” May the Holy Spirit open my lips and your hearts, that we may receive blessings.
a.	First of all, we shall speak of THE GLORIOUS AND PRECIOUS OBJECT OF MEMORY–“This do in remembrance of Me.” Christians have many treasures to lock up in the cabinet of memory. They ought to remember their election–“Chosen of God before time began.” They ought to be mindful of their extraction, that they were taken out of the miry clay, hewn out of the horrible pit. They ought to recollect their effectual calling, for they were called of God and rescued by the power of the Holy Spirit. They ought to remember their special deliverances–all that has been done for them and all the mercies bestowed on them.
But there is One whom they should embalm in their souls with the most costly spices–One who, above all other gifts of God, deserves to be had in perpetual remembrance. One, I said, for I mean not an act, I mean not a deed. But it is a Person whose portrait I would frame in gold and hang up in the state-room of the soul. I would have you earnest students of all the deeds of the conquering Messiah. I would have you conversant with the life of our Beloved. But O forget not His Person. For the text says, “This do in remembrance of ME.” It is Christ’s glorious Person which ought to be the object of our remembrance. It is His image which should be enshrined in every temple of the Holy Spirit.
But some will say, “How can we remember Christ’s Person when we never saw it? We cannot tell what was the peculiar form of His visage. We believe His countenance to be fairer than that of any other man–although through grief and suffering more marred–but since we did not see it, we cannot remember it. We never saw His feet as they trod the journeys of His mercy. We never beheld His hands as He stretched them out full of loving kindness. We cannot remember the wondrous intonation of His language, when in more than seraphic eloquence, He awed the multitude and chained their ears to Him. We cannot picture the sweet smile that ever hung on His lips nor that awful frown with which He dealt out anathemas against the Pharisees. We cannot remember Him in His sufferings and agonies for we never saw Him.”
Well, Beloved, I suppose it is true that you cannot remember the visible appearance, for you were not then born. But do you not know that even the Apostle said though He had known Christ after the flesh, yet, thenceforth after the flesh He would know Christ no more. The natural appearance, the race, the descent, the poverty, the humble garb–they are nothing in the Apostle’s estimation of His glorified Lord. And thus, though you do not know Him after the flesh, you may know Him after the spirit. In this manner you can remember Jesus as much now as Peter, or Paul, or John, or James, or any of those favored ones who once trod in His footsteps, walked side by side with Him, or laid their heads upon His bosom. Memory annihilates distance and leaps over time and can behold the Lord, though He is exalted in glory.
Ah, let us spend five minutes in remembering Jesus. Let us remember Him in His baptism, when descending into the waters of Jordan, a voice was heard, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” Behold Him coming up dripping from the stream. Surely the conscious water must have blushed that it contained its God. He slept within its waves a moment–to consecrate the tomb of Baptism–in which those who are dead with Christ are buried with Him. Let us remember Him in the wilderness, where He went straight from His immersion. Oh, I have often thought of that scene in the desert, when Christ, weary and worn, sat down, perhaps upon the gnarled roots of some old tree!
Forty days had He fasted. He was hungry. Then in the extremity of His weakness there came the evil spirit. Perhaps he had veiled his demon royalty in the form of some aged pilgrim and taking up a stone, said, “Wayworn pilgrim, if you are the Son of God command this stone to be made bread.” Methinks I see him, with his cunning smile and his malicious leer, as he held the stone and said “If”–blasphemous if–“If you are the Son of God, command that this stone shall become a meal for me and you, for both of us are hungry and it will be an act of mercy. You can do it easily, speak the word and it shall be like the bread of Heaven. We will feed upon it and you and I will be friends forever.”
But Jesus said–and O how sweetly did He say it–“Man shall not live by bread alone.” Oh, how wonderfully did Christ fight the Tempter! Never was there such a battle as that. It was a duel foot to foot–a single-handed combat–when the champion lion of the pit and the mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah fought together. Splendid sight! Angels stood around to gaze upon the spectacle, just as men of old did sit to see the tournament of noted warriors. There Satan gathered up his strength. Here Apollyon concentrated all his Satanic power that in this giant wrestle he might overthrow the Seed of the woman. But Jesus was more than a match for him. In the wrestling He gave him a deadly fall and came out more than a conqueror. Lamb of God! I will remember Your desert strivings when next I combat with Satan. When next I have a conflict with roaring Diabolus I will look to Him who conquered once for all and broke the dragon’s head with His mighty blows!
Further, I beseech you remember Him in all His daily temptations and hourly trials, in that life-long struggle of His through which He passed. Oh, what a mighty tragedy was the death of Christ! And His life, too! Ushered in with a song, it closed with a shriek, “It is finished.” It began in a manger and ended on a Cross–but oh, the sad interval between! Oh, the black pictures of persecution when His friends abhorred Him. When His foes frowned at Him as He passed the streets. When He heard the hiss of calumny and was bitten by the foul tooth of envy. When slander said He had a devil and was mad–that He was a drunken man and a wine-bibber–and when His righteous soul was vexed with the ways of the wicked. Oh, Son of God, I must remember You. I cannot help remembering You, when I think of those years of toil and trouble which You did live for my sake.
But do you know my chosen theme–the place where I can always best remember Christ? It is a shady garden full of olives. O that spot! I would that I had eloquence, that I might take you there. Oh, if the Spirit would but take us and set us down hard by the mountains of Jerusalem, I would say, see, there runs the brook of Isedron, which the king Himself did pass. And there you see the olive trees. Possibly, at the foot of that olive tree lay the three disciples when they slept.
And there, ah, there, I see drops of blood! Stand here, my Soul, a moment. Those drops of blood–do you behold them? Mark them. They are not the blood of wounds–they are the blood of a Man whose body was then unwounded. O my soul, picture Him when He knelt down in agony and sweat–sweat because He wrestled with God–sweat because He agonized with His Father. “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me.” O Gethsemane! Your shades are deeply solemn to my soul. But ah, those drops of blood! Surely it is the climax of the height of misery. It is the last of the mighty acts of this wondrous sacrifice. Can love go deeper than that? Can it stoop to greater deeds of mercy? Oh, had I eloquence I would bestow a tongue on every drop of blood that is there–that your hearts might rise in mutiny against your languor and coldness and speak out with earnest burning remembrance of Jesus. And now, farewell, Gethsemane.
But I will take you somewhere else where you shall still behold the “Man of Sorrows.” I will lead you to Pilate’s hall and let you see Him endure the mockeries of cruel soldiers–the smiting of mailed gloves, the blows of clenched fists. The shame, the spitting, the plucking of the hair–the cruel buffetings. Oh, can you not picture the King of Martyrs stripped of His garments–exposed to the gaze of fiend-like men? See you not the crown about His temples, each thorn acting as a lancet to pierce His head? Stare you not at His lacerated shoulders and the white bones starting out from the bleeding flesh? Oh, Son of Man! I see You scourged and flagellated with rods and whips! How can I cease to remember You? My memory would be more treacherous than Pilate, did it not ever cry, Ecce Homo– “Behold the man.”
Now, finish the scene of woe by a view of Calvary. Think of the pierced hands and the bleeding side. Think of the scorching sun and then the entire darkness. Remember the broiling fever and the dread thirst. Think of the death shriek, “It is finished!” and of the groans which were its prelude. This is the Object of memory. Let us never forget Christ. I beseech you, for the love of Jesus, let Him have the chief place in your memories. Let not the Pearl of Great Price be dropped from your careless hand into the dark ocean of oblivion.
I cannot, however, help saying one thing before I leave this head–and that is, there are some of you who can very well carry away what I have said because you have read it often and heard it before. But still you cannot spiritually remember anything about Christ because you never had Him manifested to you–and what we have never known–we cannot remember. Thanks be unto God, I speak not of you all, for in this place there is a goodly remnant according to the election of grace and to them I turn. Perhaps I could tell you of some old barn, hedge-row, or cottage. Or if you have lived in London, about some garret, or some dark lane or street, where first you met with Christ. Or some chapel into which you strayed and you might say, “Thank God, I can remember the seat where first He met with me and spoke the whispers of love to my soul and told me He had purchased me”–
“Do mind the place, the spot of ground, 
Where Jesus did you meet?”
Yes and I would love to build a temple on the spot and to raise some monument there–where Jehovah-Jesus first spoke to my soul and manifested Himself to me. But He has revealed Himself to you more than once–has He not? And you can remember scores of places where the Lord has appeared of old unto you, saying, “Behold I have loved you with an everlasting love.” If you cannot all remember such things, there are some of you that can. And I am sure they will understand me when I say, come and do this in remembrance of Christ–in remembrance of all His loving visitations–of His sweet wooing words–of His winning smiles upon you–of all He has said and communicated to your souls. Remember all these things tonight, if it is possible for memory to gather up the mighty aggregate of grace. “Bless the Lord, O my soul and forget not all His benefits.”
II. Having spoken upon the blessed Object of our memory, we say, secondly, a little upon THE BENEFITS TO BE DERIVED FROM A LOVING REMEMBRANCE OF CHRIST.
Love never says, “Cui bono?” Love never asks what benefit it will derive from love. Love from its very nature is a disinterested thing. It loves for the creature’s sake it loves and for nothing else. The Christian needs no argument to make Him love Christ–just as a mother needs no argument to make her love her child. She does it because it is her nature to do so. The new-born creature must love Christ–it cannot help it. Oh, who can resist the matchless charms of Jesus Christ?–the fairest of ten thousand fairs, the loveliest of ten thousand loves. Who can refuse to adore the prince of perfection, the mirror of beauty, the majestic Son of God? But yet it may be useful to us to observe the advantages of remembering Christ, for they are neither few nor small.
And first, remembrance of Jesus will tend to give you hope when you are under the burden of your sins. Let us notice a few characters here tonight. There comes in a poor creature. Look at him! He has neglected himself this last month. He looks as if he had hardly eaten his daily bread. What is the matter with you? “Oh,” says he, “I have been under a sense of guilt. I have been again and again lamenting, because I fear I can never be forgiven–once I thought I was good, but I have been reading the Bible and I find that my heart is ‘deceitful above all things and desperately wicked.’ I have tried to reform, but the more I try, the deeper I sink in the mire. There is certainly no hope for me. I feel that I deserve no mercy–it seems to me that God must destroy me, for He has declared, ‘The soul that sins it shall die.’ And die I must, be damned I must, for I know I have broken God’s Law.”
How will you comfort such a man? What soft words will you utter to give him peace? I know! I will tell him to remember Christ. I will tell him there is One who paid the mighty debt of misery. Yes, I will tell you drunkard, swearer–whatever you have been–I will tell you that there is One who for you has made a complete atonement. If you only believe on Him you are safe forever. Remember Him, you poor dying, hopeless creature and you shall be made to sing for joy and gladness. Look, the man believes and in ecstasy exclaims, “Oh, come all you that fear God and I will tell you what He has done for my soul”–
“Tell it unto sinners, tell, 
I am, I am out of Hell.”
Hallelujah! God has blotted out my sins like a thick cloud! That is one benefit to be derived from remembering Christ. It gives us hope under a sense of sin and tells us there is mercy yet.
Now, I must have another character. And what does he say? “I cannot stand it any longer–I have been persecuted and ill-treated because I love Christ. I am mocked and laughed at and despised–I try to bear it, but I really cannot. A man will be a man–tread upon a worm and he will turn upon you. My patience altogether fails me. I am in such a peculiar position that it is of no use to advise me to have patience, for patience I cannot have. My enemies are slandering me and I do not know what to do.”
What shall we say to that poor man? How shall we give him patience? What shall we preach to him? You have heard we wish some friend to say to us? Shall we tell him that other persons have borne as much? He will say, “Miserable comforters are you all!” No, I will tell him, Brother, you are persecuted. But remember the words of Jesus Christ, how He spoke unto us and said, “Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you.”
My Brother! Think of Him, who when He died, prayed for His murderers and said, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” All you have to bear is as nothing compared with His mighty sufferings. Take courage–face it again like a man–never say die. Let not your patience be gone. Take up your cross daily and follow Christ. Let Him be your motto–set Him before your eyes. And, now, receiving this, hear what the man will say. He tells you at once–“Hail, persecution! Welcome shame! Disgrace for Jesus shall be my honor and scorn shall be my highest glory–
‘Now, for the love I bear His name, 
What was my gain I count my loss, 
I pour contempt on all my shame, 
And nail my glory to His cross.’ "
There is another effect, you see, of remembering Christ. It tends to give us patience under persecution. It is a girdle to brace up the loins so that our faith may endure to the end.
Dear Friends, I should occupy your time too much if I went into the several benefits. So I will only just run over one or two blessings to be received. It will give us strength in temptation. I believe that there are hours with every man when he has a season of terrific temptation. There was never a vessel that lived upon the mighty deep but sometimes it has to do battle with a storm. There she is, the poor boat, rocked up and down on the mad waves. See how they throw her from wave to wave, all toss her to mid-Heaven. The winds laugh her to scorn. Old Ocean takes the ship in his dripping fingers and shakes it to and fro. How the mariners cry out for fear!
Do you know how you can put oil upon the waters and all shall be still? Yes, one potent word shall do it. Let Jesus come. Let the poor heart remember Jesus and steadily, then, the ship shall sail, for Christ has the helm. The winds shall blow no more, for Christ shall bid them shut their mighty mouths and never again disturb His child. There is nothing which can give you strength in temptation and help you to weather the storm like the name of Jesus Christ, the incarnate Son of God.
Then again, what comfort it will give you on a sick bed–the name of Christ! It will help you to be patient to those who wait upon you and to endure the sufferings which you have to bear. Yes, it shall be so with you, that you shall have more hope in sickness than in health and shall find a blessed sweetness in the bitterness of gall. Instead of feeling vinegar in your mouth through your trouble, you shall find honey for sweetness in the midst of all the trial and trouble that God will put upon you–“For He gives songs in the night.”
But just to close up the advantages of remembering Christ–do you know where you will have the benefit most of all? Do you know the place where chiefly you will rejoice that you ever thought of Him? I will take you to it. Hush! Silence! You are going upstairs into a lonely rooms. The curtains hang down. Someone stands there weeping. Children are around the bed and friends are there. See that man lying there? That is yourself–look at how his eyes are your eyes–his hands are your hands. That is yourself–you will be there soon, Man! That is yourself–do you see it?
It is a picture of yourself–those are your eyes that soon will be closed in death–your hands that will lie stiff and motionless–your lips that will be dry and parched, between which they will put drops of water. Those are your words that freeze in air and drop so slowly from your dying lips. I wonder whether you will be able to remember Christ there? If you do not, I will picture you. Behold that man, straight up in the bed–see his eyes starting from their sockets? His friends are all around, they ask him what he sees. He represses the emotion. He tells them he sees nothing. They know that there is something before his eyes. He starts again. Good God! what is that I see–I seem to see? That is it? Ah, one sigh! The soul is gone.
The body is there. What did he see? He saw a flaming throne of judgments. He saw God upon it with His scepter. He saw books opened. He beheld the Throne of God and saw a messenger with a sword brandished in the air to smite him low. Man! That is yourself. There you will be soon. That picture is your own portrait. I have photographed you to the life. Look at it. That is where you shall be within a few years–yes, within a few days.
But if you can remember Christ, shall I tell you what you will do? Oh, you will smile in the midst of trouble. Let me “Farewell! Weep not for me! The kind God shall wipe away all tears from every eye.” Those round about are addressed, “Prepare to meet your God and follow me to the land of bliss.” Now he has set his house in order. It is done. Behold him, like good old Jacob, leaning on his staff, about to die. See how his eyes sparkle! He claps his hands–they gather round to hear what he has to say. He whispers, “Victory!” And summoning a little more strength, he cries, “Victory!” And at last, with his final gasp, “Victory, through Him that loved us!” And He dies. This is one of the great benefits to be derived from remembering Christ–to be enabled to meet death with blessed composure.
III. We are now arrived at the third portion of our meditations which is A SWEET AID TO MEMORY.
At schools we use certain books, called “Aids to Memory.” I am sure they rather perplexed than assisted me. Their utility was equivalent to that of a bundle of staves under a traveler’s arm–true, he might use them one by one to walk with, but in the meantime he carried a host of others which he would never need. But our Savior was wiser than all our teachers and His remembrances are true and real aids to memory. His love tokens have an unmistakable language and they sweetly win our attention.
Behold the whole mystery of the sacred Eucharist. It is bread and wine which are lively emblems of the body and blood of Jesus. The power to excite remembrance consists in the appeal thus made to the senses. Here the eye, the hand, the mouth find joyful work. The bread is tasted and entering within, works upon the sense of taste, which is one of the most powerful remembrances. The wine is sipped–the act is palpable. We know that we are drinking and thus the senses which are usually clogs to the soul become wines to lift the mind in contemplation.
Again–much of the influence of this ordinance is found in its simplicity. How beautifully simple the ceremony is–bread broken and wine poured out. There is no calling that thing a chalice, that thing a paten and that a host. Here is nothing to burden the memory–here is the simple bread and wine. He must have no memory at all who cannot remember that he has eaten bread and that he has been drinking wine. Note again, the mighty pregnancy of these signs–how full they are of meaning. Bread broken–so was your Savior broken. Bread to be eaten–so His flesh is meat indeed. Wine poured out, the pressed juice of the grape–so was your Savior crushed under the foot of Divine Justice. His blood is your sweetest wine. Wine to cheer your heart–so does the blood of Jesus. Wine to strengthen and invigorate you–so does the blood of the Mighty Sacrifice. Oh, make that bread and wine to your souls tonight a sweet and blessed help of remembrance of that dear Man who once on Calvary died. Like the little ewe lamb, you are now to eat your Master’s bread and drink from His cup. Remember the hand which feeds you.
But before you can remember Christ well here, you must ask the assistance of the Holy Spirit. I believe there ought to be a preparation before the Lord’s Supper. I do not believe in Mrs. Toogood’s preparation, who spent a week in preparing and then finding it was not the Ordinance Sunday, she said she had lost all the week. I do not believe in that kind of preparation. But I do believe in a holy preparation for the Lord’s Supper–when we can on a Saturday, if possible, spend an hour in quiet meditation on Christ and His passion. When, especially on the Sabbath afternoon, we can devoutly sit down and behold Him–then these scenes become realities and not mockeries, as they are to some.
I fear greatly that there are some of you who will eat the bread tonight and will not think about Christ–some of you who will drink the wine and not think of His blood–and vile hypocrites you will be while you do it. Take heed to yourselves, “He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks–what?–"damnation to himself.” This is plain English. Mind what you are doing! Do not do it carelessly. For of all the sacred things on earth, it is the most solemn. We have heard of some men banded together by draining blood from their arms and drinking it all round. That was most horrid, but at the same time most solemn.
Here you are to drink blood from the veins of Christ and sip the trickling stream which gushed from His own loving heart. Is not that a solemn thing? Ought anybody to trifle with it? To go to church and take it for sixpence? To come and join us for the sake of getting charities? Away with it! It is an awful blasphemy against Almighty God and among the damned in Hell! Those shall be among the most accursed who dared thus to mock the holy ordinance of God. This is the remembrance of Christ. “This do in remembrance of Me.” If you cannot do it in remembrance of Christ, I beseech you, as you love your souls, do not do it at all. Oh, regenerate man or woman, enter not into the court of the priests, lest Israel’s God resent the intrusion.
IV. And now to close up. Here is A SWEET COMMAND–“This do in remembrance of Me.” To whom does this command apply? “This do YOU.” It is important to answer this question–“This do YOU.” Who are intended? You who put your trust in Me. “This do you in remembrance of Me.” Well, now, you should suppose Christ speaking to you tonight. And He says, “This do you in remembrance of Me.” Christ watches you at the door. Some of you go home and Christ says, “I thought I said, ‘This do you in remembrance of Me.’ ” Some of you keep your seats as spectators. Christ sits with you and He says, “I thought I said, ‘This do you in remembrance of Me.’ ” “Lord, I know You did.” “Do you love Me then?” “Yes, I love You. I love You, Lord, You know I do.” “But, I say, go down there–eat that bread, drink that wine.” “I do not like too, Lord. I should have to be baptized if I joined that Church and I am afraid I shall catch cold, or be looked at. I am afraid to go before the Church, for I think they would ask some questions I could not answer.”
“What?” asks Christ, “Is this all you love Me? Is this all your affection to your Lord? Oh, how cold to Me, your Savior. If I had loved you no more than this, you would have been in Hell–if that were the full extent of My affection, I should not have died for you. Great love bore great agonies–and is this all your gratitude to Me?” Are not some of you ashamed, after this? Do you not say in your hearts, “it is really wrong”? Christ says “Do this in remembrance of Me,” and are you not ashamed to stay away? I give a free invitation to every lover of Jesus to come to this table. I beseech you, deny not yourselves the privilege by refusing to unite with the church. If you still live in sinful neglect of this ordinance, let me remind you that Christ has said, “Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me in this generation, of him will I be ashamed, when I come in the glory of My Father.”
Oh, soldier of the Cross, act not the coward’s part! And not to lead you into any mistakes, I must just add one thing and then I have done. When I speak of your taking the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper, do not imagine that I wish you for one moment to suppose that there is anything saving in it. Some say that the ordinance of Baptism is non-essential. So is the ordinance of the Lord’s Supper–it is non-essential, if we look upon it in the light of salvation. Be saved by eating a piece of bread? Nonsense, confounded nonsense! Be saved by drinking a drop of wine? Why, it is too absurd for common sense to admit any discussion upon!
You know it is the blood of Jesus Christ. It is the merit of His agonies. It is the purchase of His sufferings–it is what He did–that alone can save us. Venture on Him–venture wholly–and then you are saved. Do you know, poor convicted Sinner, the way of salvation? If I ever meet you in the next world, you might, perhaps, say to me, “I spent one evening, Sir, in hearing you and you never told me the way to Heaven.” Well, you shall hear it–
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, trust in His name, find refuge in His Cross, rely upon the power of His Spirit, trust in His righteousness and you are saved beyond the vengeance of the Law, or the power of Hell. But trust in your own works and you are lost as sure as you are alive.
Now, O ever glorious Son of God, we approach Your table to feast on the viands of grace. Permit each of us, in reliance upon Your Spirit, to exclaim in the words of one of Your own poets–
“Remember You and all Your pains 
And all Your love to me?–Yes, 
While a pulse or breath remains, 
I will remember You. 
And when these failing lips grow dark 
And thought and memory flee 
When You shall in Your kingdom come, 
Jesus, remember me!”
“And that officer answered the man of God and said, Now, behold, if the Lord should make windows in Heaven might such a thing be? And he said, Behold, you shall see it with your eyes but shall not eat thereof.”
2 Kings 7:19
ONE wise man may deliver a whole city. One good man may be the means of safety to a thousand others. The holy ones are “the salt of the earth,” the means of the preservation of the wicked. Without the godly as a buffer, the race would be utterly destroyed. In the city of Samaria there was one righteous man–Elisha, the servant of the Lord. Piety was altogether extinct in the court. The king was a sinner of the blackest dye, his iniquity was glaring and infamous. Jehoram walked in the ways of his father Ahab and made unto himself false gods. The people of Samaria were fallen like their monarch–they had gone astray from Jehovah. They had forsaken the God of Israel–they remembered not the watchword of Jacob, “The Lord your God is one God.”
And in wicked idolatry they bowed before the idols of the Heathens. Therefore the Lord of Hosts suffered their enemies to oppress them until the curse of Ebal was fulfilled in the streets of Samaria, for “the tender and delicate woman who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness,” had an evil eye to her own children and devoured her offspring by reason of fierce hunger (Deut. 28:56-58). In this awful extremity the one Holy man was the medium of salvation. The one grain of salt preserved the entire city–the one warrior for God was the means of the deliverance of the whole beleaguered multitude.
For Elisha’s sake the Lord sent the promise that the next day food which could not be obtained at any price, should be had at the cheapest possible rate–at the very gates of Samaria. We may picture the joy of the multitude when first the Seer uttered this prediction. They knew him to be a Prophet of the Lord. He had Divine credentials. All his past prophecies had been fulfilled. They knew that he was a man sent of God and uttering Jehovah’s message. Surely the monarch’s eyes would glisten with delight and the emaciated multitude would leap for joy at the prospects of so speedy a release from famine.
“Tomorrow,” would they shout, “tomorrow our hunger shall be over and we shall feast to the full.” However, the officer on whom the king leaned expressed his disbelief. We hear not that any of the common people, the plebeians, ever did so. But an aristocrat did it. Strange it is that God has seldom chosen the great men of this world. High places and faith in Christ do seldom well agree. This great man said, “Impossible!” And, with an insult to the Prophet, he added, “If the Lord should make windows in Heaven, might such a thing be”? His sin lay in the fact that after repeated proofs of Elisha’s ministry, he yet disbelieved the assurances uttered by the Prophet on God’s behalf.
He had, doubtless seen the marvelous defeat of Moab–he had been startled at tidings of the resurrection of the Shunamite’s son. He knew that Elisha had revealed Benhadad’s secrets and smitten his marauding hosts with blindness. He had seen the bands of Syria decoyed into the heart of Samaria. And he probably knew the story of the widow, whose oil filled all the vessels and redeemed her sons. At all events the cure of Naaman was common conversation at court. And yet, in the face of all this accumulated evidence, in the teeth of all these credentials of the Prophet’s mission, he yet doubted and insultingly told him that Heaven must become an open casement, before the promise could be performed.
Whereupon God pronounced his doom by the mouth of the man who had just now proclaimed the promise–“you shall see it with your eyes but shall not eat thereof.” And Providence–which always fulfils prophecy–just as the paper takes the stamp of the type–destroyed the man. Trod down in the streets of Samaria, he perished at its gates beholding the plenty, but tasting not of it. Perhaps his carriage was haughty and insulting to the people. Or he tried to restrain their eager rush. Or, perhaps, as we would say, it might have been by mere “accident” that he was crushed to death. But he saw the prophecy fulfilled and never lived to enjoy it.
In his case, seeing was believing, but it was not enjoying. I shall this morning invite your attention to two things–the man’s sin and his punishment. Perhaps I shall say but little of this man, since I have detailed the circumstances, but I shall discourse upon the sin of unbelief and the punishment thereof.
a.	And first, the SIN. His sin was unbelief. He doubted the promise of God. In this particular case unbelief took the form of a doubt of the Divine veracity, or a mistrust of God’s power. Either he doubted whether God really meant what He said, or whether it was within the range of possibility that God should fulfill His promise. Unbelief has more phases than the moon and more colors than the chameleon. Common people say of the devil that he is seen sometimes in one shape and sometimes in another. I am sure this is true of Satan’s first-born child–unbelief, for its forms are legion.
At one time I see unbelief dressed out as an angel of light. It calls itself humility and it says, “I would not be presumptuous. I dare not think that God would pardon me. I am too great a sinner.” We call that humility and thank God that our friend is in so good a condition. I do not thank God for any such delusion. It is the devil dressed as an angel of light–it is unbelief after all. At other times we detect unbelief in the shape of a doubt of God’s immutability. “The Lord has loved me, but perhaps He will cast me off tomorrow. He helped me yesterday and under the shadows of His wings I trust. But perhaps I shall receive no help in the next affliction. He may have cast me off. He may He unmindful of His Covenant and forget to be gracious.”
Sometimes this infidelity is embodied in a doubt of God’s power. We see every day new straits we are involved in–a net of difficulties–and we think, “surely the Lord cannot deliver us.” We strive to get rid of our burden and finding that we cannot do it, we think God’s arm is as short as ours and His power as little as human might. A fearful form of unbelief is that doubt which keeps men from coming to Christ, which leads the sinner to distrust the ability of Christ to save him, to doubt the willingness of Jesus to accept so great a transgressor.
But the most hideous of all is the traitor, in its true colors, blaspheming God and madly denying His existence. Infidelity, deism and atheism are the ripe fruits of this pernicious tree. They are the most terrific eruptions of the volcano of unbelief. Unbelief has become of full stature, when quitting the mask and laying aside disguise, it profanely stalks the earth, uttering the rebellious cry, “No God.” striving in vain to shake the Throne of the divinity, by lifting up its arm against Jehovah and in its arrogance would–
“Snatch from His hand the balance and the rod, 
Rejudge His justice–be the god of God.”
Then, truly, unbelief has come to its full perfection. And then you see what it really is–for the least unbelief is of the same nature as the greatest.
I am astonished and I am sure you will be, when I tell you that there are some strange people in the world who do not believe that unbelief is a sin. Strange people I must call them, because they are sound in their faith in every other respect. Only to make the articles of their creed consistent, as they imagine, they deny that unbelief is sinful. I remember a young man going into a circle of friends and ministers who were disputing whether it was a sin in men that they did not believe the Gospel. While they were discussing it, he said, “Gentlemen am I in the presence of Christians? Are you believers in the Bible, or are you not?”
They said, “We are Christians, of course.” “Then,” said he, “does not the Scripture say, of sin, ‘because they believed not on Me?’ And is it not the dawning sin of sinners, that they do not believe on Christ?” I could not have thought that persons should be so foolhardy as to venture to assert that, “it is no sin for a sinner not to believe on Christ.” I thought that however far they might wish to push their sentiments, they would not tell a lie to uphold the Truth and, in my opinion, this is what such men are really doing. Truth is a strong tower and never requires to be buttressed with error. God’s Word will stand against all man’s devices.
I would never invent a sophism to prove that it is no sin on the part of the ungodly not to believe, for I am sure it is. I am taught in the Scriptures that, “This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world and men love darkness rather than light.” and when I read, “he that believes not is condemned already, because he believes not on the Son of God.” I affirm and the Word declares it, unbelief is a sin. Surely with rational and unprejudiced persons, it cannot require any reasoning to prove it. Is it not a sin for a creature to doubt the word of its Maker? Is it not a crime and an insult to the Divinity, for me, an atom, a particle of dust, to dare to deny His words?
Is it not the very summit of arrogance and extremity of pride for a son of Adam to say, even in his heart, “God I doubt Your grace. God I doubt Your love. God I doubt Your power”? Oh, Sirs believe me, could you roll all sins into one mass–could you take murder, blasphemy, lust, adultery and fornication and everything that is vile and unite–them all into one vast globe of black corruption, they would not equal, even then–the sin of unbelief. This is the monarch sin, the quintessence of guilt, the mixture of the venom of all crimes. The dregs of the wine of Gomorrah. It is the A1 sin, the masterpiece of Satan, the chief work of the devil.
I shall attempt this morning, for a little while, to show the extremely evil nature of the sin of unbelief.
And first the sin of unbelief will appear to be extremely heinous when we remember that it is the parent of every other iniquity. There is no crime which unbelief will not beget. I think that the Fall of man is very much owing to it. It was in this point that the devil tempted Eve. He said to her, “Yes, has God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the garden?” He whispered and insinuated a doubt, “Yes, has God said so?” As much as to say, “Are you quite sure He said so?” It was by means of unbelief that this part of the wedge–the other sin entered–curiosity–and the rest followed. She touched the fruit and destruction came into this world.
Since that time, unbelief has been the prolific parent of all guilt. An unbeliever is capable of the vilest crime that ever was committed. Unbelief, Sirs! Why it hardened the heart of Pharaoh–it gave license to the tongue of blaspheming Rabshakeh–yes, it became a deicide and murdered Jesus. Unbelief! It has sharpened the knife of the suicide! It has mixed many a cup of poison. Thousands it has brought to the halter and many to a shameful grave who have murdered themselves and rushed with bloody hands before their Creator’s tribunal because of unbelief!
Give me an unbeliever–let me know that he doubts God’s Word–let me know that he distrusts His promise and His threat. And with that for a premise, I will conclude that the man shall, by-and-by, unless there is amazing restraining power exerted upon him, be guilty of the foulest and blackest crimes. Ah, this is a Beelzebub sin! Like Beelzebub, it is the leader of all evil spirits. It is said of Jeroboam that he sinned and made Israel to sin. And it may be said of unbelief that it not only sins itself, but makes others sin. It is the egg of all crime, the seed of every offense. In fact everything that is evil and vile lies couched in that one word–unbelief.
And let me say here that unbelief in the Christian is of the same nature as unbelief in the sinner. It is not the same in its final issue, for it will be pardoned in the Christian. Yes, it is pardoned–it was laid upon the scapegoat’s head of old–it was blotted out and atoned for. But it is of the same sinful nature. In fact, if there can be one sin more heinous than the unbelief of a sinner, it is the unbelief of a saint. For a saint to doubt God’s Word–for a saint to distrust God after innumerable instances of His love, after ten thousand proofs of His mercy–exceeds everything. In a saint, moreover, unbelief is the root of other sins. When I am perfect in faith I shall be perfect in everything else–I should always fulfill the precept if I always believe the promise.
But it is because my faith is weak that I sin. Put me in trouble and if I can fold my arms and say, “Jehovah-Jireh the Lord will provide,” you will not find me using wrong means to escape from it. But let me be in temporal distress and difficulty, if I distrust God, what then? Perhaps I shall steal, or do a dishonest act to get out of the hands of my creditors. Or if kept from such a transgression, I may plunge into excess to drown my anxieties. Once take away faith, the reins are broken. And who can ride an unbroken steed without rein or bridle? Like the chariot of the sun with Phaeton for its driver, such would we be without faith. Unbelief is the mother of vice. It is the parent of sin–and, therefore, I say it is a pestilent evil–a master sin.
But secondly–unbelief not only begets, but fosters sin. How is it that men can keep their sin under the thunders of the Sinai preacher? How is it that, when Boanerges stands in the pulpit and, by the grace of God, cries aloud, “Cursed is every man that keeps not all the commands of the Law”–how is it that when the sinner hears the tremendous threats of God’s justice, still he is hardened and walks on in his evil ways? I will tell you. It is because unbelief of that threat prevents it from having any effect upon him.
When our sappers and miners go to work around Sebastopol, they could not work in front of the walls if they had not something to keep off the shots. So they raise earthworks, behind which they can do what they please. So with the ungodly man. The devil gives him unbelief. He thus puts up an earthwork and finds refuge behind it. Ah, Sinners, when once the Holy Spirit knocks down your unbelief–when once He brings home the Truth in demonstration and in power–how the Law will work upon your soul! If man did but believe that the Law is holy, that the Commandments are holy, just and good, how he would be shaken over Hell’s mouth. There would be no sitting and sleeping in God’s house. No careless hearers. No going away and straightway forgetting what manner of men you are.
Oh, once get rid of unbelief, how would every ball from the batteries of the Law fall upon the sinner and the slain of the Lord would be many. Again, how is it that men can hear the wooing of the Cross of Calvary and yet come not to Christ? How is it that when we preach about the sufferings of Jesus and close up by saying, “yet there is room”–how is it that when we dwell upon His Cross and passion, men are not broken in their hearts? It is said–
“Law and terrors do but harden 
All the while they work alone 
But a sense of blood-bought pardon 
Will dissolve a heart of stone.”
Methinks the tale of Calvary is enough to break a rock. Rocks did rend when they saw Jesus die. Methinks the tragedy of Golgotha is enough to make a flint gush with tears and to make the most hardened wretch weep out his eyes in drops of penitential love. But yet we tell you and repeat it often, but who weeps over it? Who cares about it? Sirs, you sit as unconcerned as if it did not have any meaning to you. Oh, I bellow and see all you that pass by. Is it nothing to you that Jesus should die? You seem to say, “It is nothing.” What is the reason? Because there is unbelief between you and the Cross. If there were not that thick veil between you and the Savior’s eyes, His looks of love would melt you.
But unbelief is the sin which keeps the power of the Gospel from working in the sinner–and it is not till the Holy Spirit strikes that unbelief out–it is not till the Holy Spirit rends away that infidelity and takes it altogether down that we can find the sinner coming to put His trust in Jesus.
But there is a third point. Unbelief disables a man for the performance of any good work– “Whatsoever is not of faith is sin,” is a great truth in more senses than one. “Without faith it is impossible to please God.” You shall never hear me say a word against morality. You shall never hear me say that honesty is not a good thing, or that sobriety is not a good thing. On the contrary, I would say they are commendable things. But I will tell you what I will say afterwards–I will tell you that they are just like the Dowries of India. They may pass current among the Indians, but they will not do in England. These virtues may be current here below, but not above. If you have not something better than your own goodness, you will never get to Heaven.
Some of the Indian tribes use little strips of meat instead of money and I would not find fault with them if I lived there. But when I come to England, strips of meat will not suffice. So honesty, sobriety and such things, may be very good among men–and the more you have of them the better. I exhort you, whatsoever things are lovely and pure and of good report, have there–but they will not do up there. All these things put together, without faith do not please God. Virtues without faith are whitewashed sins. Obedience without faith, if it is possible, is a gilded disobedience. Not to believe nullifies everything. It is the fly in the ointment. It is the poison in the pot.
Without faith all the virtues of purity, all the benevolence of philanthropy, all the kindness of disinterested sympathy, all the talents of genius, all the bravery of patriotism and all the decision of principle–“without faith it is impossible to please God.” Do you not see, then, how bad unbelief is? It prevents men from performing good works. Yes, even in Christians themselves, unbelief disables them.
Let me just tell you a tale–a story of Christ’s life. A certain man had an afflicted son, possessed with an evil spirit. Jesus was up in Mount Tabor, transfigured. So the father brought his son to the disciples. What did the disciples do? They said, “Oh, we will cast him out.” They put their hands upon him and they tried to do it. But they whispered among themselves and said, “We are afraid we shall not be able.” By-and-by the diseased man began to froth at the mouth, he foamed and scratched the earth, clasping it in his madness. The demoniac spirit within him was alive. The devil was still there. In vain their repeated exorcisms-the evil spirit remained like a lion in his den–nor could their efforts dislodge him.
“Go!” said they. But he went not, “Away to the pit!” they cried. But he remained immoveable. The lips of unbelief cannot affright the Evil One, who might well have said, “Faith I know, Jesus I know, but who are you? You have no faith.” If they had had faith, as a grain of mustard seed, they might have cast the devil out! But their faith was gone and That was a splendid walk. I almost envy him treading upon the billows. Why, if Peter’s faith had continued, he might have walked across the Atlantic to America.
But presently there came a billow behind him and he said, “That will sweep me away.” And then another and he cried out, “That will overwhelm me.” And he thought–how could I be so presumptuous as to be walking on the top of these waves? Downs goes Peter. Faith was Peter’s life buoy. Faith was Peter’s charm–it kept him up. But unbelief sent him down. Do you know that you and I, all our lifetime, will have to walk on the water? A Christian’s life is always walking on water–mine is–and every wave would swallow and devour him but faith makes him stand. The moment you cease to believe, that moment distress comes in and down you go. Oh, Why do you doubt, then?
Faith fosters every virtue–unbelief murders every one. Thousands of prayers have been strangled in their infancy by unbelief. Unbelief has been guilty of infanticide. It has murdered many an infant petition, many a song of praise that would have swelled the chorus of the skies, has been stifled by an unbelieving murmur. Many a noble enterprise conceived in the heart has been blighted by unbelief before it could come forth. Many a man would have been a missionary, would have stood and preached his Master’s Gospel boldly–but he had unbelief. Once make a giant unbelieving and he becomes a dwarf–Faith is the Samsonian lock of the Christian–cut it off and you may put out his eyes–and he can do nothing.
Our next remark is–unbelief has been severely punished. Turn you to the Scriptures! I see a world all fair and beautiful–its mountains laughing in the sun and the fields rejoicing in the golden light. I see maidens dancing and young men singing. How fair the vision! But lo, a grave and reverend sire lifts up his hand and cries, “A flood is coming to deluge the earth–the fountains of the great deep will be broken up and all things will be covered. See yonder ark! One hundred and twenty years have I toiled with these my hands to build it–flee there and you are safe.”
“Aha, old man–away with your empty predictions! Aha, let us be happy while we may! When the flood comes, then we will build an ark–but there is no flood coming–tell that to fools. We believe no such things.” See the unbelievers pursue their merry dance. Hark! Unbeliever. Do you not hear that rumbling noise? Earth’s bowels have begun to move, her rocky ribs are strained by dire convulsions from within. Lo, they break with the enormous strain and from between them torrents rush unknown since God concealed them in the bosom of our world. Heaven is split in sunder! It rains. Not drops, but clouds descend. A cataract, like that of old Niagara, rolls from Heaven with mighty noise.
Both firmaments, both deeps–the deep below and the deep above–do clasp their hands. Now Unbelievers, where are you now? There is your last remnant. A man–his wife clasping him round the waist–stands on the last summit that is above the water. See him there? The water is up to his loins even now. Hear his last shriek! He is floating–he is drowned. And as Noah looks from the ark he sees nothing. Nothing! It is a void profound. “Sea monsters whelp and stable in the palaces of kings.” All is overthrown, covered, drowned. What has done it? What brought the flood upon the earth? Unbelief. By faith Noah escaped from the flood. By unbelief the rest were drowned.
And, oh, do you not know that unbelief kept Moses and Aaron out of Canaan? They honored not God–they struck the rock when they ought to have spoken to it. They disbelieved–and therefore the punishment came upon them–that they should not inherit that good land, for which they had toiled and labored.
Let me take you where Moses and Aaron dwelt–to the vast and howling wilderness. We will walk about it for a time. Sons of the weary foot, we will become like the wandering Bedouins, we will tread the desert for a while. There lies a carcass whitened in the sun–there another and there another. What means these bleached bones? What are these bodies–there a man and there a woman? What are all these? How came these corpses here? Surely some grand encampment must have been here cut off in a single night by a blast, or by bloodshed.
Ah, no, no. Those bones are the bones of Israel. Those skeletons are the old tribes of Jacob. They could not enter because of unbelief. They trusted not in God. Spies said they could not conquer the land. Unbelief was the cause of their death. It was not the Anakims that destroyed Israel. It was not the howling wilderness which devoured them. It was not the Jordan which proved a barrier to Canaan–neither Hivite or Jebusite slew them. It was unbelief alone which kept them out of Canaan. What a doom to be pronounced on Israel, after forty years of journeying–they could not enter because of unbelief!
Not to multiply instances, recollect Zechariah. He doubted and the angel struck him dumb. His mouth was closed because of unbelief. But oh, if you would have the worst picture of the effects of unbelief–if you would see how God has punished it–I must take you to the siege of Jerusalem. The worst massacre which time has ever seen, when the Romans raised the walls to the ground and put the whole of the inhabitants to the sword, or sold them as slaves in the marketplace. Have you never read of the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus? Did you never turn to the tragedy of Masada, when the Jews stabbed each other rather than fall into the hands of the Romans?
Do you not know, that to this day the Jew walks through the earth a wanderer, without a home and without a land? He is cut off, as a branch is cut from a vine–and why? Because of unbelief. Each time you see a Jew with a sad and somber countenance–each time you mark him like a denizen of another land, treading as an exile in this our country–each time you see him, pause and say, “Ah, it was unbelief which caused you to murder Christ and now it has driven you to be a wanderer. And faith alone–faith in the crucified Nazarene–can fetch you back to your country and restore it to its ancient grandeur.”
Unbelief, you see, has the mark of Cain upon its forehead. God hates it–God has dealt hard blows upon it–and God will ultimately crush it. Unbelief dishonors God. Every other crime touches God’s territory. But unbelief aims a blow at His divinity, impeaches His veracity, denies His goodness, blasphemes His attributes, maligns His character. Therefore, God of all things, hates first and chiefly, unbelief, wherever it is.
And now to close this point–for I have been already too long–let me remark that you will observe the heinous nature of unbelief in this–that it is the dammed sin. There is one sin for which Christ never died. It is the sin against the Holy Spirit. There is one other sin for which Christ never made atonement. Mention every crime in the calendar of evil and I will show you persons who have found forgiveness for it. But ask me whether the man who died in unbelief can be saved and I reply there is no atonement for that man. There is an atonement made for the unbelief of a Christian, because it is temporary, but the final unbelief–the unbelief with which men die–never was atoned for.
You may turn over this whole Book and you will find that there is no atonement for the man who died in unbelief. There is no mercy for him. Had he been guilty of every other sin but had believed, he would have been pardoned. But this is the damning exception–he had no faith. Devils seize him! O fiends of the pit, drag him downward to his doom! He is faithless and unbelieving and such are the tenants for whom Hell was built. It is their portion, their prison–they are the chief prisoners, the fetters are marked with their names. Forever shall they know that, “He that believes not shall be damned.”
II. This brings us now to conclude with the PUNISHMENT. “You shall see it with your eyes, but shall not eat thereof.” Listen, Unbelievers! You have heard this morning your sin, now listen to your doom–“you shall see it with your eyes, but shall not eat thereof.” It is so often with God’s own saints. When they are unbelieving, they see the mercy with their eyes, but do not eat it. Now, there is corn in this land of Egypt. But there are some of God’s saints who come here on the Sabbath and say, “I do not know whether the Lord will be with me or not.” Some of them say, “Well, the Gospel is preached, but I do not know whether it will be successful.”
They are always doubting and fearing. Listen to them when they get out of the chapel. “Well, did you get a good meal this morning?” “Nothing for me.” Of course not. You could see it with your eyes, but did not eat it, because you had no faith. If you had come up with faith, you would have had a morsel. I have found Christians who have grown so very critical that if the whole portion of the meat they are to have, in due season, is not cut up exactly into square pieces and put upon some choice dish of porcelain they cannot eat it. Then they ought to go without. And they will have to go without, until they are brought to their appetites.
They will have some affliction which will act like quinine upon them–they will be made to eat by means of bitters in their mouths. They will be put in prison for a day or two until their appetite returns. Then they will be glad to eat the most ordinary food, off the most common platter, or no platter at all. But the real reason why God’s people do not feed under a Gospel ministry is because they have not faith. If you believed, if you did but hear one promise that would be enough. If you only heard one good thing from the pulpit, here would be food for your soul. It is not the quantity we hear, but the quality we believe that does us good–it is that which we receive into our hearts with true and lively faith–that is our profit.
But let me apply this chiefly to the unconverted. They often see great works of God done with their eyes, but they do not eat thereof. A crowd of people have come here this morning to see with their eyes, but I doubt whether all of them eat. Men cannot eat with their eyes, for if they could, most would be well fed. And, spiritually, persons cannot feed simply with their ears, nor simply with looking at the preacher. And so we find the majority of our congregations come just to see. “Ah, let us hear what this babbler would say, this reed shaken in the wind.”
But they have no faith. They come and they see. And see. And see and never eat. There is someone in the front there, who gets converted. And someone down below who is called by sovereign grace–some poor sinner is weeping under a sense of his blood-guiltiness. Another is crying for mercy to God–and another is saying, “Have mercy upon me, a sinner.” A great work is going on in this chapel, but some of you do not know anything about it. You have no work going on in your hearts–and why? Because you think it is impossible. You think God is not at work. He has not promised to work for you who do not honor Him. Unbelief makes you sit here in times of revival and of the outpouring of God’s grace, unmoved, uncalled, unsaved.
But, Sirs, the worst fulfillment of this doom is to come! Good Whitfield used sometimes to lift up both his hands and shout, as I wish I could shout, but my voice fails me–“The wrath to come! The wrath to come!” It is not the wrath now you have to fear, but the wrath to come–and there shall be a doom to come, when “you shall see it with your eyes, but shall not eat thereof.”
Methinks I see the last great day. The last hour of time has struck. I heard the bell toll its death knell–time was, eternity is ushered in–the sea is boiling. The waves are lit up with supernatural splendor. I see a rainbow–a flying cloud and on it there is a Throne–and on that Throne sits one like unto the Son of Man. I know Him. In His hand He holds a pair of balances–just before Him the books–the Book of Life, the Book of Death, the Book of Remembrance. I see His splendor and I rejoice at it. I behold His pompous appearance and I smile with gladness that He is come to be “admired of all His saints.”
But there stands a throng of miserable wretches, crouching in horror to conceal themselves and yet looking–for their eyes must look on Him whom they have pierced. But when they look they cry, “Hide me from the face.” What face? “Rocks, hide me from the face.” What face? “The face of Jesus, the Man who died, but now is come to judgment.” But you cannot hide from His face. You must see it with your eyes–but you will not sit on the right hand, dressed in robes of grandeur–and when the triumphal procession of Jesus in the clouds shall come, you shall not march in it. You shall see it, but you shall not be there.
Oh, methinks I see it now, the mighty Savior in His chariot, riding on the rainbow to Heaven! See how His mighty coursers make the sky rattle while He drives them up Heaven’s hill. A train girt in white follow behind Him and at His chariot wheels He drags the devil, death and Hell. Hark! How they clap their hands. Hark, how they shout, “You have ascended up on high–You have led captivity captive.” Hark! How they chant the solemn lay, “Hallelujah, the Lord God omnipotent reigns.” See the splendor of their appearance. Mark the crown upon their brows–see their snow-white garments–mark the rapture of their countenances! Hear how their song swells up to Heaven while the Eternal joins therein, saying, “I will rejoice over them with joy, I will rejoice over them with singing, for I have betrothed you unto Me in everlasting loving kindness.”
But where are you all the while? You can see them up there but where are you? Looking at it with your eyes, but you cannot eat thereof. The marriage banquet is spread. The good old wines of eternity are broached. They sit down to the feast of the King. But there you are, miserable and famishing. And you cannot eat thereof. Oh, how you wring your hands. Might you but have one morsel from the table–might you but be dogs beneath the table. You shall be a dog in Hell, but not a dog in Heaven.
But to conclude. Methinks I see you in some place in Hell, tied to a rock, the vulture of remorse gnawing your heart. And up there is Lazarus in Abraham’s bosom. You lift up your eyes and you see who it is. “That is the poor man who lay on my dunghill and the dogs licked his sores. There he is in Heaven, while I am cast down. Lazarus–yes, it is Lazarus. And I who was rich in the world of time am here in Hell. Father Abraham, send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, to cool my tongue.” But no! It cannot be. It cannot be. And while you lie there, if there be one thing in Hell worse than another, it will be seeing the saints in Heaven.
Oh, to think of seeing my mother in Heaven while I am cast out! Oh, Sinner, only think–to see your brother in Heaven–he who was rocked in the same cradle and played beneath the same roof–yet you are cast out! And, husband, there is your wife in Heaven and you are among the damned, And see you, father! Your child is before the Throne. And you, accursed of God and accursed of man, are in Hell. Oh, the Hell of hells will be to see our friends in Heaven and yourselves lost. I beseech you, my Hearers, by the death of Christ–by His agony and bloody sweat–by His Cross and passion–by all that is holy–by all that is sacred in Heaven and earth–by all that is solemn in time or eternity–by all that is horrible in Hell, or glorious in Heaven–by that awful thought, “forever”–I beseech you lay these things to heart and remember that if you are damned, it will be unbelief that damns you. If you are lost, it will be because you believed not on Christ. And if you perish, this shall be the bitterest drop of gall–that you did not trust in the Savior.
“Come, see the place where the Lord lay.”
Matthew 28:6
EVERY circumstance connected with the life of Christ is deeply interesting to the Christian mind. Wherever we behold our Savior, He is well worthy of our notice–
“His Cross, His manger and His crown, 
Are big with glories yet unknown.”
All His weary pilgrimage, from Bethlehem’s manger to Calvary’s Cross, is in my eyes, paved with glory. Each spot upon which He trod is to our souls consecrated at once, simply because there the foot of earth’s Savior and our own Redeemer once was placed. When He comes to Calvary the interest thickens–then our best thoughts are centered on Him in the agonies of crucifixion.
Nor does our deep affection permit us to leave Him, even when, the struggle being over, He yields up the ghost. His body, when it is taken down from the tree, still is lovely in our eyes–we fondly linger around the motionless clay. By faith we discern Joseph of Arimathea and the timid Nicodemus, assisted by those holy women, drawing out the nails and taking down the mangled body. We behold them wrapping Him in clean white linen, hastily girding Him round with belts of spices, then putting Him in His tomb and departing for the Sabbath rest.
We shall on this occasion go where Mary went on the morning of the first day of the week, when waking from her couch before the dawn, she aroused herself to be early at the sepulcher of Jesus. We will try, if it is possible, by the help of God’s Spirit, to go as she did–not in body, but in soul–we will stand at that tomb. We will examine it and we trust we shall hear some truth-speaking voice coming from its hollow bosom which will comfort and instruct us, so that we may say of the grave of Jesus when we go away, “It was none other than the gate of Heaven”–a sacred place, deeply solemn and sanctified by the slain body of our precious Savior.
a.	AN INVITATION GIVEN. I shall commence my remarks this morning by inviting all Christians to come with me to the tomb of Jesus. “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.” We will labor to render the place attractive. We will gently take your hand to guide you to it and may it please our Master to make our hearts burn within us while we talk by the way. Away, you profane–you souls whose life is laughter, folly and mirth! Away, you sordid and carnal minds who have no taste for the spiritual, no delight in the celestial. We ask not your company. We speak to God’s Beloved, to the heirs of Heaven, to the sanctified.
We speak to the redeemed, the pure in heart–and we say to them–“Come, see the place where the Lord lay.” Surely you need no argument to move your feet in the direction of the holy sepulcher. But still we will use the utmost power to draw your spirit there. Come then, for ‘tis the shrine of greatness, 'tis the resting place of the Man, the Restorer of our race, the Conqueror of death and Hell. Men will travel hundreds of miles to behold the place where a poet first breathed the air of earth. They will journey to the ancient tombs of mighty heroes, or the graves of men renowned by fame.
But where shall the Christian go to find the grave of one so famous as was Jesus? Ask me the greatest man who ever lived–I tell you the Man Christ Jesus was “anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows.” If you seek a chamber honored as the resting place of genius, turn in here. If you would worship at the grave of holiness, come here. If you would see the hallowed spot where the choicest bones that ever were fashioned lay for awhile, come with me, Christian, to that quiet garden, hard by the walls of Jerusalem.
Come with me, moreover, because it is the tomb of your best Friend. The Jews said of Mary, “She goes unto His grave to weep there.” You have lost your Friends, some of you–you have planted flowers upon their graves–you go and sit at eventide upon the green sward, bedewing the grass with your tears, for there your mother lies and there your father, or your wife. Oh, in pensive sorrow come with me to this dark garden of our Savior’s burial. Come to the grave of your best Friend–your Brother–yes, one who “sticks closer than a brother.”
Come, then, to the grave of your dearest relative, O Christian, for Jesus is your Husband, “your Maker is your Husband, the Lord of Hosts is His name.” Does not affection draw you? Do not the sweet lips of love woo you? Is not the place sanctified where one so well-beloved slept, although but for a moment? Surely you need no eloquence. If it were needed I have none. I have but the power in simple, but earnest accents, to repeat the words, “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.” On this Easter morning pay a visit to His grave, for it is the grave of your best Friend.
Yes, more, I will further urge you to this pious pilgrimage. Come, for angels bid you. Angels said, “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.” The Syrian version reads, “Come, see the place where our Lord lay.” Yes, angels put themselves with those poor women and used one common pronoun–our. Jesus is the Lord of angels as well as of men. You feeble women–you have called Him Lord, you have washed His feet, you have provided for His wants, you have hung upon His lips to catch His honeyed sentences, you have sat entranced beneath His mighty eloquence.
You call Him Master and Lord and you do well. “But,” said the seraph, “He is my Lord, too.” Bowing his head, he sweetly said, “Come, see the place where our Lord lay.” Do not fear, then, Christian, to step into that tomb. Do not dread to enter there, when the angel points with his finger and says, “Come, we will go together–angels and men–and see the royal bedchamber.” You know that angels did go into His tomb, for they sat one at His head and the other at His foot in holy meditation.
I picture to myself those bright cherubs sitting there talking to one another. One of them said, “It was there His feet lay.” And the other replied, “And there His hands and there His head.” And in celestial language did they talk concerning the deep things of God. Then they stooped and kissed the rocky floor, made sacred to the angels themselves, not because there they were redeemed, but because there their Master and their Monarch, whose high behests they were obeying, did for awhile become the slave of death and the captive of destruction.
Come, then, Christian, for angels are the porters to unbar the door. Come, for a cherub is your messenger to usher you to the death-place of death himself. No, start not from the entrance. Let not the darkness frighten you–the vault is not damp with the vapors of death, nor does the air contain anything of contagion. Come, for it is a pure and healthy place. Fear not to enter that tomb. I will admit that catacombs are not the places where we, who are full of joy, would love to go. There is something gloomy and noisome about a vault. There are noxious smells of corruption. Oftentimes pestilence is born where a dead body has lain. But fear it not, Christian, for Christ was not left in Hell–in Hades–neither did His body see corruption.
Come, there is no scent–yes, rather a perfume. Step in here and, if you did ever breathe the gales of Ceylon, or winds from the groves of Araby, you shall find them far excelled by that sweet holy fragrance left by the blessed body of Jesus, that alabaster vase which once held divinity and was rendered sweet and precious thereby. Think not you shall find anything obnoxious to your senses. Jesus never saw corruption. No worms ever devoured His flesh. No rottenness ever entered into His bones.
He saw no corruption. Three days He slumbered, but not long enough to putrefy. He soon arose, perfect as when He entered. Uninjured as when His limbs were composed for their slumber. Come then, Christian, summon up your thoughts, gather all your powers–here is a sweet invitation–let me press it again. Let me lead you by the hand of meditation, my Brothers and Sisters. Let me take you by the arm of your fancy and let me again say to you, “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.”
There is yet one reason more why I would have you visit this Royal sepulcher–because it is a quiet spot. Oh, I have longed for rest, for I have heard this world’s rumors in my ears so long, that I have begged for–
“A lodge in some vast wilderness, 
Some boundless contiguity of shade”
where I might hide myself forever. I am sick of this tiring and trying life. My frame is weary, my soul is mad to repose herself awhile. I would I could lie myself down a little by the edge of some pebbly brook, with no companion save the fair flowers or the nodding willows.
I would I could recline in stillness, where the air brings balm to the tormented brain, where there is no murmur save the hum of the summer bee–no whisper except that of the zephyrs and no song except the caroling of the lark. I wish I could be at ease for a moment. I have become a man of the world–my brain is racked, my soul is tired. Oh, would you be quiet, Christian? Merchant, would you rest from your toils? Would you be calm for once, then come here.
It is in a pleasant garden, far from the hum of Jerusalem. The noise and din of business will not reach you here. “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.” It is a sweet resting spot, a withdrawing room for your soul where you may brush your garments from dust of earth and muse awhile in peace.
II. ATTENTION REQUESTED. Thus I have pressed the invitation–now we will enter the tomb. Let us examine it with deep attention, noticing every circumstance connected with it.
And first, mark that it is a costly tomb. It is no common grave. It is not an excavation dug out by the spade for a pauper in which to hide the last remains of his miserable and over-wearied bones. It is a princely tomb. It was made of marble, cut in the side of a hill. Stand here, Believer and ask why Jesus had such a costly sepulcher. He had no elegant garments. He wore a coat without seam, woven from the top throughout, without an atom of embroidery. He owned no sumptuous palace, for He had not where to lay His head. His sandals were not rich with gold, or studded with brilliants. He was poor.
Why, then, does He lie in a noble grave? We answer, for this reason–Christ was unhonored till He had finished His sufferings. Christ’s body suffered contumely, shame, spitting, buffeting and reproach until He had completed His great work. He was trampled under foot, He was “despised and rejected of men. A Man of Sand acquainted with grief.” But the moment He had finished His undertaking, God said, “No more shall that Body be disgraced. If it is to sleep, let it slumber in an honorable grave. If it is to rest, let nobles bury it. Let Joseph, the councilor and Nicodemus, the man of Sanhedrim, be present at the funeral.
“Let the Body be embalmed with precious spices, let it have honor. It has had enough of contumely, shame, reproach and buffeting. Let it now be treated with respect.” Christian, do you discern the meaning? Jesus, after He had finished His work, slept in a costly grave–for now His Father loved and honored Him, since His work was done.
But though it is a costly grave, it is a borrowed one. I see over the top of it, “Sacred to the memory of the family of Joseph of Arimathea.” Yet Jesus slept there. Yes, He was buried in another’s sepulcher. He who had no house of His own and rested in the habitation of other men. He who had no table, but lived upon the hospitality of His disciples. He who borrowed boats in which to preach and had not anything in the wide world, was obliged to have a tomb from charity. Oh, should not the poor take courage? They dread to be buried at the expense of their neighbors. But if their poverty is unavoidable, why should they blush, since Jesus Christ Himself was interred in another’s grave?
Ah, I wish I might have had Joseph’s grave, to let Jesus be buried in it. Good Joseph thought he had cut it out for himself. He thought that he should lay his bones there. He had it excavated as a family vault and lo, the Son of David makes it one of the tombs of the kings. But he did not lose it by lending it to the Lord–rather, he had it back with precious interest. He only lent it three days–then Christ resigned it–He had not injured but perfumed and sanctified it and made it far more holy. So that it would be an honor in future to be buried there. It was a borrowed tomb–and why? I take it not to dishonor Christ, but in order to show that as His sins were borrowed sins so His burial was in a borrowed grave.
Christ had no transgressions of His own. He took ours upon His head. He never committed a wrong but He took all my sin–and all yours–if you are Believers. Concerning all His people, it is true, He bore their griefs and carried their sorrows in His own body on the tree. Therefore, as they were others' sins so He rested in another’s grave. As they were sins imputed, so that grave was only imputably His. It was not His sepulcher–it was the tomb of Joseph.
Let us not weary in this pious investigation, but with fixed attention observe everything connected with this holy spot. The grave, we observe, was cut in a rock. Why was this? The Rock of Ages was buried in a rock–a Rock within a rock. But why? Most persons suggest that it was so ordained that it might be clear that there was no covert way by which the disciples or others could enter and steal the body away. Very possibly it was the reason, but oh, my Soul, can you not find a spiritual reason? Christ’s sepulcher was cut in a rock. It was not cut in mold that might be worn away by water, or might crumble and fall into decay.
The sepulcher stands, I believe, entire to this day. If it does not naturally, it does spiritually. The same sepulcher which took the sins of Paul shall take my iniquities into its bosom. For if I ever lose my guilt, it must roll off my shoulders into the sepulcher. It was cut in a rock so that if a sinner were saved a thousand years ago, I, too, can be delivered, for it is a rocky sepulcher where sin was buried. It was a rocky sepulcher of marble where my crimes were laid forever–buried never to have a resurrection.
You will mark, moreover, that tomb was one wherein no other man had ever lain. Christopher Ness says, “When Christ was born He lay in a virgin’s womb and when He died He was placed in a virgin tomb. He slept where never man had slept before.” The reason was that none might say that another person rose, for there never had been any other body there, thus a mistake of persons was impossible. Nor could it be said that some old Prophet was interred in the place and that Christ rose because He had touched his bones. You remember when Elisha was buried and as they were burying a man, behold he touched the Prophet’s bones and arose. Christ touched no Prophet’s bones, for none had ever slept there. It was a new chamber, where the Monarch of the earth did take His rest for three days and three nights.
We have learned a little, then, with attention. But let us stoop down once more before we leave the grave and notice something else. We see the grave, but do you notice the grave-clothes, all folded neatly and laid in their places, the napkin being folded up by itself? Why are the grave-clothes folded? The Jews said robbers had abstracted the body. But if so, surely they would have stolen the clothes. They would never have thought of folding them up and laying them down so carefully–they would be too much in haste to think of it. Why was it then? To manifest to us that Christ did not come out in a hurried manner.
He slept till the last moment. Then He awoke–He came not in haste. They shall not come out in haste–neither by flight–but at the appointed moment shall His people come to Him. So at the precise hour, the decreed instant, Jesus Christ leisurely awoke, took off His cerements, left them all behind Him and came forth in His pure and naked innocence, perhaps to show us that as clothes are the offspring of sin–when sin was atoned for by Christ, He left all raiment behind Him–for garments are the badges of guilt. If we had not been guilty we should never have needed them.
Then, the napkin, mark you, was laid by itself. The grave-clothes were left behind for every departed Christian to wear. The bed of death is well sheeted with the garments of Jesus, but the napkin was laid by itself, because the Christian, when He dies, does not need that. It is used by the mourners and the mourners only. We shall all wear grave-clothes but we shall not need the napkin. When our Friends die, the napkin is laid aside for us to use, but do our ascended Brothers and Sisters use it? No, the Lord God has wiped away all tears from their eyes.
We stand and view the corpses of the dear departed, we moisten their faces with our tears, letting whole showers of grief fall on their heads, but do they weep? Oh, no. Could they speak to us from the upper spheres, they would say, “weep not for me, for I am glorified. Sorrow not for me. I have left a bad world behind me and have entered into a far better.” They have no napkin–they weep not. Strange it is that those who endure death weep not. But those who see them die are weepers. When the child is born it weeps when others smile (say the Arabs) and when it dies it smiles while others weep.
It is so with the Christian. O blessed thing! The napkin is laid by itself, because Christians will never want to use it when they die.
III. EMOTION EXCITED, We have thus surveyed the grave with deep attention, and, I hope, with some profit to ourselves. But that is not all. I love a religion which consists, in a great measure, of emotion. Now, if I had power, like a master I would touch the strings of your hearts and fetch a glorious tune of solemn music from them! For this is a deeply solemn place, into which I have conducted you.
First, I would bid you stand and see the place where the Lord lay with emotions of deep sorrow. O come, my beloved Brothers and Sisters, your Jesus once lay there. He was a murdered man, my Soul, and you the murderer–
“Ah, you, my sins, my cruel sins, 
His chief tormentors were, 
Each of my crimes became a nail, 
And unbelief the spear. 
Alas, and did my Savior bleed? 
And did my Sovereign die?”
I slew Him–this right hand struck the dagger to His heart. My deeds slew Christ. Alas, I slew my best Beloved. I killed Him who loved me with an everlasting love.
You eyes, why do you refuse to weep when you see Jesus' body mangled and torn? Oh, give rent to your sorrow, Christians, for you have good reason to do so. I believe in what Hart says, that there was a time in his experience when he could so sympathize with Christ that he felt more grief at the death of Christ than he did joy. It seemed so sad a thing that Christ should have to die and to me it often appears too great a price for Jesus Christ to purchase worms with His own blood. Methinks I love Him so much that if I had seen Him about to suffer, I should have been as bad as Peter and have said, “That be far from You, Lord.” But then He would have said to me, “Get you behind me, Satan.”
For He does not approve of that love which would stop Him from dying. “The cup which My Father has given Me, shall I not drink it?” But I think had I seen Him going up to His Cross, I would gladly have pressed Him back and said, “Oh, Jesus, You shall not die. I cannot have it. Will You purchase my life with a price so dear?” It seems too costly for Him who is the Prince of Life and glory to let His fair limbs be tortured in agony. That the hands which carried mercies should be pierced with accursed nails. That the temples that were always clothed with love should have cruel thorns driven through them.
It appears too much. Oh, weep, Christian and let your sorrow rise! Is not the price all but too great, that your Beloved should for you resign Himself? Oh, I should think if a person were saved from death by another, he would always feel deep grief if his deliverer lost his life in the attempt. I had a Friend, who, standing by the side of a piece of frozen water saw a young lad in it and sprang upon the ice in order to save him. After clutching the boy he held him in his hands and cried out, “Here he is! Here he is! I have saved him.” But just as they caught hold of the boy, he sank himself and his body was not found for some time afterwards.
Oh, it is so with Jesus. My soul was drowning. From Heaven’s high portals He saw me sinking in the depths of Hell. He plunged in–
“He SANK beneath His heavy woes, 
To raise me to a crown; 
There’s never a gift His hand bestows, 
But cost His heart a groan.”
Ah, we may indeed regret our sin, since it slew Jesus.
Now, Christian, change your note a moment. “Come, see the place where the Lord lay,” with joy and gladness. He does not lie there now. Weep, when you see the tomb of Christ, but rejoice because it is empty. Your sin slew Him, but His divinity raised Him up. Your guilt has murdered Him, but His righteousness has restored Him. Oh, He has burst the bonds of death. He has ungirt the cerements of the tomb and has come out more than conqueror, crushing death beneath His feet. Rejoice, O Christian, for He is not there–He is risen. “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.”
One more thought and then I will speak a little concerning the doctrines we may learn from this grave. “Come, see the place where the Lord lay” with solemn awe, for you and I will have to lay there, too–
“Hark! from the tomb a doleful sound, 
My ears, attend the cry. 
You living men, come view the ground, 
Where you must shortly lie. 
Princes, this clay must be your bed, 
In spite of all your powers. 
The tall, the wise, the reverend head, 
Must lie as low as ours.”
It is a fact we do not often think of–that we shall all be dead in a little while. I know that I am made of dust and not of iron. My bones are not brass, nor my sinews steel–in a little while my body must crumble back to its native elements. But do you ever try to picture yourself the moment of your dissolution? My Friends, there are some of you who seldom realize how old you are, how near you are to death. One way of remembering our age is to see how much remains. Think how old eighty is and then see how few years there are before you will get there. We should remember our frailty.
Sometimes I have tried to think of the time of my departure. I do not know whether I shall die a violent death or not but I would to God that I might die suddenly, for sudden death is sudden glory. I would I might have such a blessed exit as Doctor Beaumont and die in my pulpit laying down my body with my charge and ceasing at once to work and live. But it is not mine to choose. Suppose I lie lingering for weeks in the midst of pains and griefs and agonies? When that moment comes, that moment which is too solemn for my lips to speak of, when the spirit leaves the clay–let the physician put it off for weeks or years, as we say he does, though he does not–when that moment comes, oh, you lips, be dumb and profane not its solemnity.
When death comes, how is the strong man bowed down! How does the mighty man fall! They may say they will not die, but there is no hope for them–they must yield–the arrow has gone home. I knew a man who was a wicked wretch and I remember seeing him pace the floor of his bedroom, saying, “O God, I will not die, I will not die.” When I begged him to lie on his bed for he was dying, he said he could not die while he could walk and he would walk till he did die. Ah, he expired in the utmost torments, always shrieking, “O God, I will not die.”
Oh, that moment, that last moment! See how clammy is the sweat upon the brow, how dry the tongue, how parched the lips are? The man shuts his eyes and slumbers, then opens them again. And if he is a Christian, I can fancy he will say–
“Hark! they whisper–angels say 
Sister spirit, come away. 
What is this absorbs me quite–
Steals my senses–shuts my sight–
Drowns my spirit–draws my breath? 
Tell me, my Soul, can this be death?”
We know not when one will die. One gentle sigh and the spirit breaks away. We can scarcely say, “He is gone,” before the ransomed spirit takes its mansion near the Throne. Come to Christ’s tomb then, for the silent vault must soon be your habitation. Come to Christ’s grave, for you must slumber there. And even you, you Sinners, for one moment I will ask you to come also because you must die as well as the rest of us. Your sins cannot keep you from the jaws of death. I say, Sinner, I want you to look at Christ’s sepulcher too–for when you die it may have done you great good to think of it.
You have heard of Queen Elizabeth crying out that she would give an empire for a single hour. Or, have you read the despairing cry of the gentleman on board the “Arctic,” when it was going down, who shouted to the boat, “Come back! I will give you £30.000 if you will come and take me in.” Ah, poor man. It were but little if he had thirty thousand worlds, if he could thereby prolong his life! “Skin for skin. Yes, all that a man has will he give for his life.”
Some of you who laugh this morning, who came to spend a merry hour in this hall, will be dying and then you will pray and crave for life and shriek for another Sabbath-Day. Oh, how the Sabbaths you have wasted will walk like ghosts before you! Oh, how they will shake their snaky hair in your eyes! How will you be made to sorrow and weep because you wasted precious hours, which, when they are gone, are gone too far ever to be recalled. May God save you from the pangs of remorse.
IV. INSTRUCTION IMPARTED. And now, Christian Brethren, “Come, see the place where the Lord lay,” to learn a doctrine or two. What did you see when you visited “the place where the Lord lay?” “He is not here–for He is risen!” The first thing you perceive, if you stand by His empty tomb, is His Divinity. The dead in Christ shall rise first at the resurrection, but He who rose first–their Leader, rose in a different fashion. They rise by imparted power. He rose by His own. He could not slumber in the grave because He was God. Death had no dominion over Him.
There is no better proof of Christ’s divinity than that startling resurrection of His, when He rose from the grave, by the glory of the Father. O Christian, your Jesus is GOD. His broad shoulders that hold you up are indeed Divine. And here you have the best proof of it–because He rose from the grave.
A second doctrine here taught well may charm you, if the Holy Spirit applies it with power. Behold this empty tomb, O true Believer–it is a sign of your acquittal and your full discharge. If Jesus had not paid the debt, He would never had risen from the grave. He would have lain there till this moment if He had not cancelled the entire debt by satisfying eternal vengeance. Oh, Beloved, is not that an overwhelming thought?–
“It is finished! It is finished! 
Hear the rising Savior cry.”
The heavenly turnkey came. A bright angel stepped from Heaven and rolled away the stone–but he would not have done so if Christ had not done all. He would have kept Him there. He would have said, “No, no, you are the sinner now. You have the sins of all your elect upon your shoulder and I will not let you go free till you have paid the uttermost farthing.” In His going free I see my own discharge–
“My Jesus' blood’s my full discharge”
As a justified man, I have not a sin against me in God’s book. If I were to turn over God’s eternal book I should see every debt of mine receipted and cancelled–
“Here’s pardon for transgressions past, 
It matters not how black their cast, 
And O my Soul with wonder view, 
For sins to come here’s pardon, too. 
While through Your blood absolved I am 
From sin’s tremendous curse and blame.”
One more doctrine we learn and with that we will conclude–the doctrine of the resurrection. Jesus rose and as the Lord our Savior rose, so all His followers must rise. Die I must–this body must be a carnival for worms, it must be eaten by those tiny cannibals–perhaps it shall be scattered from one portion of the earth to another. The constituent particles of this my frame will enter into plants, from plants pass into animals and thus be carried into far distant realms. But at the blast of the archangel’s trumpet every separate atom of my body shall find its fellow–like the bones lying in the valley of vision, though separated from one another–the moment God shall speak, the bone will creep to its bone, then the flesh shall come upon it. The four winds of Heaven shall blow and the breath shall return!
So, let me die, let beasts devour me, let fire turn this body into gas and vapor–all its particles shall yet again be restored! This very selfsame actual body shall start up from its grave, glorified and made like Christ’s body, yet still the same body, for God has said it. Christ’s same body rose–so shall mine. O my Soul, do you now dread to die? You will lose your partner body a little while, but you will be married again in Heaven, soul and body shall again be united before the Throne of God. The grave–what is it? It is the bath in which the Christian puts the clothes of his body to have them washed and cleansed.
Death–what is it? It is the waiting room where we robe ourselves for immortality. It is the place where the body, like Esther, bathes itself in spices, that it may be fit for the embrace of its Lord. Death is the gate of life. I will not fear to die, then, but will say–
“Shudder not to pass the stream 
Venture all your care on Him–Him, 
Whose dying love and power 
Stilled its tossing, hushed its roar.; 
Safe is the expanded wave, 
Gentle as a summer’s eve–
Not one object of His care 
Ever suffered shipwreck there.,”
Come, view the place, then, with all-hallowed meditation, where the Lord lay. Spend this afternoon, my beloved Brethren, in meditating upon it and very often go to Christ’s grave both to weep and to rejoice. You timid ones–do not be afraid to approach, for ‘tis no vain thing to remember that timidity buried Christ. Faith would not have given Him a funeral at all. Faith would have kept Him above ground and would never have let Him be buried, for it would have said it would be useless to bury Christ if He were to rise.
Fear buried Him. Nicodemus, the night disciple and Joseph of Arimathea, secretly, for fear of the Jews, went and buried Him. Therefore, you timid ones, you may go, too. Ready-to-Halt, poor Fearing and you Mrs. Despondency, and Much-afraid, go often there–it is your favorite haunt. There build a tabernacle, there abide. And often say to your heart, when you are in distress and sorrow, “Come, see the place where the Lord lay.”
There can be few passages of the Bible that have become as misrepresented as this one has throughout history. Not misrepresented in a bad way – but the story has become so mythologised that it is hard to sometimes focus in on what the story says rather than what we think it says.
The picture that many of us have of this story is so different from the real thing. We sing a carol, don’t we?: “We three kings of Orient are”. But they weren’t kings – they were astrologers. You might know the names these kings have been given – Caspar, Melchior and Balthasar. But there’s no mention of that in the original story. And the story gets embellishes even further. Melchior is represented in pictures and paintings as an old man, grey haired with a long beard and he brings the gold. Caspar is young and hasn’t yet got a beard and he carries the frankincense. Balthasar is represented as having African origins with a newly grown beard on him and he brings the myrrh.
It’s a nice image – but it’s all embellishment on the story. None of it is recorded in the Bible.
And so what we need to do is avoid the pitfall of romanticizing this story too much where we begin to miss the point of what we can learn of God and our own spiritual journey and our response to Jesus, the Christ-child.
As I re-read this passage this year, for me, it is speaking of the response we can make to Jesus in our own lives. There are 3 very different responses to Jesus in this passage. Let’s have a look at them…
The first response we see is in King Herod a response of anger and rejection
1. Anger and Rejection
Herod has reigned as King in Palestine for nearly forty years and he wasn’t called Herod the Great for nothing. He was the only ruler in Palestine ever to have kept peace and stability in that region. He was a brilliant architect and builder; a man of great vision. Not only that – but he could be very generous too. In difficult times, he had been known to stop taxing people in order to give them a chance to survive. And during one particular tough famine, he even melted some of his own gold to buy corn for the starving people.
But there was one deep flaw in his character: he could be very suspicious and couldn’t tolerate others rivalling his power and he was paranoid about people plotting against him. He murdered his wife and mother-in-law. He assassinated three of his sons. Anyone who got close to claiming power from him were dealt with.
So when the three visitors from the East arrive looking for the King of the Jews, we can just imagine his reaction. There’s only one King of the Jews! No-one is taking that title from Herod! So, in his anger and paranoia, he decides to get rid of all the babies aged 2 and younger in the area of Bethlehem.
The very thought of Jesus Christ, the Messiah, made him angry. He rejected any notion that another person could have power and dominion over him.
And it is not so unusual for the mention of the name ‘Jesus’ to make people angry. Perhaps you have mentioned Jesus in a conversation and been taken aback by the over-reaction of hostility you then faced. And, often, that hostility and anger stems from a bad experience of church or Christians in the past, which then gets projected onto their view of Jesus.
For us, too, maybe there have been occasions in our own lives when we have felt angry at Jesus. Perhaps when events in our lives have taken a turn for the worst. Or someone we love has become seriously ill or died. The pain in our lives has been so intense that we have doubted our experience of God and have rejected the very idea of faith in him.
So, like King Herod, one response to Jesus is to feel angry and to reject him; reject the claim of Lordship that he makes over our lives.
The second response to Jesus is that of the chief priests and teachers of the law. And their response is one of apathy and non-committal.
2. Apathy and non-committal
King Herod goes to the chief priests and teachers of the law for advice. “Where will the Messiah be born?” he asks them. And they know the answer. They’ve studied the Scriptures. They’ve asked the questions. It’s all there in their heads: The Messiah will be born in the town of Bethlehem in Judea. They can even quote the verse to the King which backs up their theory.
But that’s what is so sad – because that’s all it is for them: theory. What would you expect from these great religious leaders? You would expect, in the next verse, to read of them all hurrying off to Bethlehem themselves to greet the Messiah they had been waiting for. But no. There’s nothing of the sort. They give Herod the answer he needs and then they get back on with their own lives, untroubled and unconcerned with the news they’ve received.
How many people do we know who know the facts about Jesus in their heads but don’t recognise him as King in their hearts? How often do we know in our heads what God wants from us but we become apathetic in delivering the goods and refuse to sit under his Lordship over us?
Apathy and being unprepared to make a commitment to God is a very real spiritual malaise. At the beginning of a New Year, it is always a good opportunity for us to look back and reflect on that which has gone before and look forward to how we can be more committed and passionate in faith for the future.
Herod rejected Jesus. The teachers of the law remained apathetic about Jesus. But there is a third way, which is the way of the visitors from the East. And that way is to accept Jesus and to worship God as a result.
3. Acceptance and worship
This is such an intriguing story for me – and it is only recorded in Matthew’s Gospel, of course. But it seems to me that this is a beautiful parable of the journey of faith that we all go through as we move into a deeper experience of God as Christians.
The story of the visitors from the East is a four-stage journey: from the head to the heart.
First, they study the facts. Their journey of faith begins with them asking questions. They are astrologers – they study the stars – and when they see a strange star in the sky, they ask themselves questions about it.
Second, they know that the only way to get an answer is to set out on a journey. But that journey involves risk. They have to come to the court of the king and risk their lives to find out about Jesus. But their desire for truth is stronger than their fear.
Third, they come into the presence of Jesus and they worship. And part of their worship is to offer him gifts: theirs is a sacrificial worship that is prepared to give as well as to receive.
And then finally, they make their way back home; back to their everyday lives, not leaving Jesus behind, but taking the experience of their encounter with them. And there’s that lovely touch in verse 12 which says that they went back by another road, inspired by God in a dream. And it’s true for all of us that once we meet with Jesus, we do take another road, life is never the same again. And it’s true too, that it is under the guidance of God that our route is chosen for us.
So in the response of the Eastern visitors to Jesus, we see our very own journey of faith. Starting with questions in the mind. Setting out on a journey, which will inevitably involve risk and vulnerability. But a journey that leads us to the Christ-child, where we give him all that we have to offer. And then God sends us out, inspiring us and guiding us the way to go; a new journey with the experience of Christ in our hearts. The way of worship and adoration; the way God chooses for us.
And so, in this remarkable story, stripped of the tinsel and the imaginary names and the made up characters, we find the most basic of Christian truths. Every one of us is confronted with the Christ-child this morning and we need to make a response. Will we be like King Herod and reject Jesus? Will we be like the chief priests and teachers of the law and remain lost in apathy? Or will we be like the visitors from the East and step out on a journey of faith? A difficult journey, not without questions and doubts, not without personal difficulties, not without sacrificial actions – but a journey that leads to Jesus Christ, God’s Son, our Saviour. A journey that takes us on a new road; a new direction under God’s guidance and within his grace and love and compassion.

